tech stocks are back (with caveats)   for the first time since the internet bubble burst at the start of this decade, technology stocks really matter -- even to investors who are wary of them.  tech has turned in the worst performance of any group of stocks over the past five years, but how the sector fares this year is likely to have major implications for the broader market.  to be sure, technology stocks account for only 15.5 percent of the market capitalization of the standard & poor's 500 index of blue-chip stocks, down from as high as 33.6 percent in 1999. but tech is still one of the largest sectors.  and if you invest in a general domestic stock fund, your personal stake in tech is probably growing, though you may not realize it. this month, a survey by merrill lynch showed that 41 percent of domestic fund managers are overweighting tech -- meaning that they are investing a greater portion of their portfolios in the sector than they normally do. in november, only 23 percent of fund managers were placing larger-than-usual bets on the group.  in fact, investment managers are more bullish on tech than they are on any other segment of the economy, according to a survey by the russell investment group.  ''tech stocks have become the darlings of the s.& p. 500,'' said mike thompson, managing director of global research at thomson financial.  that comes as somewhat of a surprise, given that tech stocks appreciated only 7.7 percent last year, on average, versus the 13.6 percent price gain for the broad s.& p. 500.  but with energy stocks and commodities possibly losing steam, investors are searching for the next investment group that may catch fire. and right now, the consensus seems to have settled on technology -- the one sector that hasn't experienced a sustained rally since the bear market of 2000.  it's noteworthy that investors aren't simply betting that tech stock prices will rise more than the broader market. rather, they are counting on tech company earnings to swell.  in fact, ''if tech earnings don't come in as forecast, then we're going to have some real problems,'' mr. thompson said.  that's because, relatively speaking, investor expectations are as high for this sector as they have been in several years.  wall street analysts predict that tech profits will grow 17 percent in 2007, according to thomson financial. by contrast, earnings among all companies in the s.& p. 500 are expected to jump by a much more modest 7.9 percent, on average. and if you strip out tech's expected contributions to the broad market, overall corporate profits are expected to improve by 6.8 percent this year. that's a far cry from the double-digit growth enjoyed by s.& p. 500 companies for the past 13 quarters.  ''it's really the first time since the bubble burst seven years ago that tech earnings are expected to be such a major contributor to the broad market's earnings,'' said jeffrey n. kleintop, chief investment strategist at pnc wealth management in philadelphia.  but therein lies a potential problem. although tech earnings are expected to improve, market strategists say that there is a distinct possibility that these companies won't quite reach the high bar that wall street has set.  there are plenty of reasons to be bullish on the sector: the introduction of microsoft's new vista operating system, for instance, is expected to set off a new round of corporate and consumer technology spending later this year and in 2008. but total technology revenues are expected to increase by only about 14 percent in 2007, according to analysts at morgan stanley. that would be a slower rate of revenue growth than in 2005 and 2006.  moreover, michael f. sola, portfolio manager of the t. rowe price science & technology fund in baltimore, points out that profit margins at many tech companies are already at or near their pre-bubble peaks. and if profit margins don't continue to improve and if revenues don't exceed expectations, it will be hard for many tech companies to meet and exceed their profit targets.  mr. sola says he is concerned that earnings expectations are already making it difficult for tech to surprise on the upside. ''typically, you get significant runs in sectors when earnings estimates start off too low and sentiment is poor,'' he said. right now, however, the opposite is true.  for his part, mr. kleintop predicts that earnings for the tech sector will grow at a much more modest pace -- around 9 to 10 percent -- this year. as a result, he said, overall s.& p. 500 earnings may grow by only around 3 percent.  how will you know who's right -- mr. kleintop or the wall street consensus? pay attention to these trends:  is i.t. spending climbing? despite the start of microsoft vista and other product upgrades, sales for information technology, including services and enterprise software, are expected grow at a slower pace than in 2005. many people believe that companies will probably wait until the latter half of this year or until 2008 to bolster spending on technology upgrades. but if companies do accelerate investments in the first half of 2007, it could be good news for tech earnings and for overall corporate profits.  is the economy slowing but growing? robert e. turner, chairman and chief investment officer of turner investment partners in berwyn, pa., said that most companies ''have moved beyond the shock of the bubble and have the money to spend on i.t.'' but this assumption depends on a slowing-but-growing economy. should talk of a possible recession creep back onto wall street, he said, all bets are off.  are tech companies hitting targets? ''in the first week of this year, there was a notion that this was the year for large-cap tech stocks,'' said john f. jostrand, portfolio manager of the william blair growth fund in chicago. but then, a group of tech companies -- including intel, apple, motorola and symantec -- reported disappointing earnings news, which has tech investors somewhat concerned. that was followed, however, by better-than-expected reports from yahoo and sun microsystems, so the trend remains unclear.  mr. jostrand points out that tech investing today is nothing like it was in the late 1990s. back then, wall street was more than willing to bet on tech's potential. today, investors actually want their tech companies to show them the money -- as in actual realized profit growth.  and if they don't deliver, investors will be more than willing to walk away from the sector -- again.  fundamentally paul j. lim is a financial writer at u.s. news & world report. e-mail: fund@nytimes.com.  