the recycled city   the virgin of flames  by chris abani.  291 pp. penguin books. paper, $14.  chris abani has done an end-run around the immigrant novel. in two previous books, abani, who was born in nigeria, traced a path from third world to first: ''graceland,'' his bustling novel set in lagos, closed with a young man's departure for the united states; his novella ''becoming abigail'' followed the title character from nigeria to london. abani now teaches at the university of california, riverside, and his strange new novel is set in los angeles. rather than adopting the perspective of a newcomer, though, he gives us black, a mural artist raised in california, the son of a nigerian father and a salvadoran mother. black was called obinna as a boy, but after his father went missing in vietnam, he lost his name along with any connection to his african ancestry.  now 36 and at loose ends, he dresses himself from time to time in a filched wedding gown, and in that guise is repeatedly mistaken for an apparition of the virgin of guadalupe. but really that's the least of his troubles: tormented by dark memories, suicidal impulses and persistent, unrelieved erections, he's obsessed with a transsexual stripper named sweet girl, and is being stalked by the angel gabriel, who sometimes assumes the form of a pigeon. his best friends are iggy, a tattoo artist and psychic (and the owner of the wedding dress) who rents him a room behind her cafe, and a rwandan named bomboy who owns a slaughterhouse -- though these two are little more than bystanders to his crisis.  black is all desire and no direction, and his story takes shape as a mystery of identity, as he wanders the city trying to reconcile himself to his memories and his peculiar urges. above all it's the matter of his roots that haunts him: ''he was trying to reinvent an origin to bury so he could finally come into this thing he wanted to be.'' his deceased parents represent not only different cultures but the poles of science and faith: his father was an arrogant postdoctoral researcher for nasa who disparaged religion, his mother a devout catholic who went around the bend after her husband's death and would beat black in front of an altar. but his father also had him wear a white dress as a young boy, to ward off a family curse, and black carries a picture of himself so attired in a pouch strung around his neck. his wedding dress fixation has something to do with the undigested legacies of both parents, as does the fact that he's built a blimplike hideout for himself -- his spaceship, he calls it -- with an altar inside.  his art, meanwhile, engages questions of what is socially offensive. he covers one wall of iggy's shop with racist and sexist jokes collected from public restrooms, interspersed with lines of poetry; he decorates the wall of bomboy's business with a painting of a 50-foot muslim woman, totally covered, strangling a dove with one hand and carrying an ak-47 in the other.  abani likewise traffics in the outrageous when bomboy wears a t-shirt with a picture of a lynching and the slogan ''just hanging,'' or when a certain stripper is mentioned for her ability to shoot ping- pong balls out of her labia. but what he's really interested in are people on the margins, and he samples both raymond chandler -- a dwarf waiter at iggy's cafe named ray-ray parrots lines from ''farewell, my lovely'' -- and diane arbus, who is quoted in the epigraph. abani's los angeles is at turns desolate and luminous, showered with ash from distant brush fires, ''a city constantly digesting its past and recycling itself into something new.'' this metropolis is one where unlikely-looking virgins draw crowds, bullet-ridden bodies go unnoticed in swimming pools and unwanted dogs are tossed from cars off a bridge. it's also a perpetual blank canvas, which black loves because it allows him to be whatever he wants -- if only he could figure out what that was.  cross-dressing, sexual confusion and the melding (or meltdown?) of cultures also figured prominently in ''graceland,'' and that book also tapped into the energy of its urban setting. abani's portrayal of lagos was richer and more authoritative than his version of los angeles, however, and the chaotic third-world terrain could better accommodate his sudden shifts from misery to comedy to violence. the combination is jarring here: in one scene, bomboy tells of having taken part in a massacre of tutsi women and children in rwanda; in another, he's scheming to sell call-to-prayer alarm clocks to muslim countrymen back home. black converses with a divine pigeon and tries to calm an erection with a bag of frozen peas; he also recalls watching his mother masturbate while she was dying of aids.  just as black combines racist jokes and lines from wallace stevens in a work entitled ''american gothic -- the remix,'' so abani imagines a place that is horrifying and tender and absurd in equal measure. but with its uneven tone and meandering story, the book doesn't quite hold together. the language veers from portentous to reportorial, and sometimes falls flat, as in a dull first-date scene between black and sweet girl. as a result the final conflagration carries less impact than it might have.  still, these are the missteps of an ambitious writer with an original perspective. in ''the virgin of flames'' he audaciously stakes his claim on a city not his own. and wisely, he doesn't so much try to reveal its hidden side as to give it a costume, or a paint job, of his own making.  karen olsson is a senior editor at texas monthly and the author of the novel ''waterloo.''  