one in eight adults in new york city has diabetes, a study finds   one in eight adults in new york city has diabetes, and nearly twice as many appear to be developing it -- a picture even grimmer than that of the nation as a whole, according to the city's first attempt to definitively measure the rate of the disease.  the study, released yesterday by the department of health and mental hygiene, shows that almost one-third of those who have diabetes are unaware of it, as are many of those with prediabetes, or abnormally high blood sugar. that means they are not working to control the ailment and fend off devastating consequences like heart disease, kidney failure, blindness and amputation.  even among those who know they have diabetes, the study found, more than half are not adequately controlling it.  ''this confirms that we as a society are doing a rotten job both preventing and controlling diabetes,'' said dr. thomas r. frieden, the city health commissioner. ''we can do a much better job helping people with diabetes get their condition under better control. the fact that there are over 100,000 new yorkers with seriously out-of-control diabetes, and over 200,000 who don't even know they have diabetes, is a real indictment of our health care system.''  as disturbing as the overall figures are, he said, they were not unexpected. they resemble estimates made by public health officials, who expected that the disease would be more common in new york city than nationally; diabetes is less prevalent among whites than among most other groups, and new york is a mostly nonwhite city.  but dr. frieden said he was startled by some of the specific findings, including the very high numbers among asian-americans, especially those from south asia. the study indicates that more than half of the new yorkers whose families are from the indian subcontinent have either diabetes or prediabetes.  more than 90 percent of diabetes cases are type 2 diabetes, which is closely linked to obesity, lack of exercise, poor diet and heredity.  it is the nation's fastest-growing major disease, and people often have it for years before it is discovered.  the department's findings are based on a study in which doctors examined and took blood samples from a representative sample of the city's population in 2004 -- more than 2,000 people from every neighborhood. the diabetes figures were the first to be released; more reports are to follow on asthma, heart disease, obesity and other conditions.  the city modeled its study closely on national studies done by the centers for disease control and prevention, and officials say that new york city's is the first local or state government to match those. the city has conducted large health surveys by telephone, but the examinations, health experts say, produce a more authoritative picture, and provide a base line for measuring changes.  over all, 12.5 percent of adult new yorkers -- more than 700,000 people -- have diabetes, the study shows. that is significantly higher than the 10.3 percent national rate. and in new york and nationally, about 30 percent of diabetics do not know it.  but dr. frieden said that within those numbers is a surprising detail: among all new yorkers with diabetes, whites are more likely than members of other racial groups to be unaware of their condition. ''it may be whites have less severe disease and therefore are less likely to be symptomatic,'' he said.  new york city also found that 23.5 percent of adults have abnormally high blood sugar, but not high enough to be considered diabetic -- rather, a condition called prediabetes, which is often a precursor to the full-fledged disease. that is similar to the national rate.  asians have the highest rates in the city, 16 percent diabetic and 32 percent prediabetic. the city's report does not differentiate asians by region, but officials said that the data in their study and others show that east asians have below-average rates of diabetes, while south asians have by far the highest of any large group.  diabetes afflicts about 14 percent of the city's non-hispanic black population, 12 percent of hispanics and 11 percent of whites.  the city has begun compiling a registry of people with diabetes, to track their control of the disease, identify the strategies that work best and determine how individual doctors and clinics are faring in treating it.  