skiercross a great place to bump into olympians   added to the winter x games 10 years ago as an appeal to youth, skiercross has instead come to be dominated by retired alpine racers creating a second act to their competitive careers.  a new event for the 2010 olympic winter games in vancouver, skiercross features four or more racers on a downhill course of big jumps, banks and rollers. often compared to motocross, competitors bump and jostle one another, leading to some spectacular crashes.  at the x games on sunday, the sport lived up to its reputation for contact on buttermilk mountain's 3,600-foot course. nine of 24 racers fell -- three were treated at a hospital and released -- beginning with elimination rounds and carrying into a thrilling final. in that race, the aspen skier casey puckett grabbed the lead out of the gate and hung on to win despite a late charge by jake fiala of frisco, colo.  coming off the course's last jump, where the snowboardcross racer lindsey jacobellis wiped out a day earlier, fiala made a final push to finish first, but he got his tips up while airborne and went skidding to the snow. his momentum carried him across the finish line, and he wound up with the silver medal.  ''i knew if i went too far to the left, i wouldn't make the landing,'' said fiala, 31, who competed in alpine events at the 2002 olympics. ''i pretty much flew into the fence.''  puckett, 34, who competed in downhill events at four olympics from 1992 through 2002, said of fiala's late push, ''i don't want to put people into the fence, but i'm going to protect my lead.''  enak gavaggio, 30, of france finished third, his seventh bronze medal at the winter x games. all three women's medalists were french: ophelie david (gold), valentine scuotto (silver) and meryll boulangeat (bronze).  the most successful and famous racer in the field was the 33-year-old daron rahlves, of sugarbowl, calif., who has 28 alpine world cup podium appearances in downhill and super-g, including 12 victories. rahlves retired from alpine competition after the 2006 olympics, his third.  although it was his first winter x games, rahlves was favored to win the gold medal in skiercross after finishing first in qualifying and in each of his quarterfinal and semifinal heats.  but during the final, rahlves inexplicably lost his balance on an upper portion of the course and went careering sideways off a jump, crashing and losing a ski.  his spill demonstrated how unpredictable skiercross can be.  ''the big thing is,'' puckett said, ''you can be the fastest skier in the world, which daron arguably is, and still not win the skiercross.''  its simplicity and unpredictability led ron semiao, the senior vice president of espn original entertainment and x games creator, to add the event for the winter x games's second season. no skiing events were held during the first winter x games in 1997 because the sport was viewed as stale and stodgy compared with snowboarding.  since its debut at the x games, skiercross has become a world cup discipline governed by the international ski federation.  but the sport's biggest boost was its inclusion in the next winter olympics. skiercross will be the third x games event to be added to the olympics, joining snowboarding halfpipe and snowboardcross.  later sunday, with the biggest, most stylish 1080-degree spins, steve fischer wound back the clock during the men's superpipe, winning the gold medal.  fischer, 24, of breckenridge, colo., last won x games gold in 2004 when he was among a select group of riders who pioneered the 1080, a spin of three full rotations. he has since struggled, finishing out of the top 10 at the x games, and failing to qualify for the 2006 olympic team.  but in the x games final, fischer beat out three american olympians, including the halfpipe gold medal winner at the turin games, shaun white, who wound up with silver.  ''it's nice to be on top,'' fischer said. ''this one is great.''  the first of fischer's three runs turned out to be the winner, with a score of 92. white was second with a 91, and 19-year-old mason aguirre of duluth, minn., won the bronze with a 90.66.  since fischer helped introduce the 1080 three years ago, it has become a requirement for a winning run. all three medal winners included at least two during their routines.  as it turned out, an easier trick undid white.  because white, 20, of carlsbad, calif., finished first in qualifying, he had the last run and a chance to unseat fischer for gold. he could do no worse than second, but on his final run he landed low on a 540-degree spin known as a mctwist, a relatively midlevel move. on his prior run, white's board struck the deck during a mctwist.  ''i had a sketch, and that's what cost me gold,'' said white, who has not competed in a halfpipe contest since winning the u.s. open of snowboarding in march 2006. white has been inundated with commercial opportunities since winning olympic gold, and he said they have interfered with his riding.  extreme sports  