talks to resume on north korea and weapons   china announced tuesday that talks over north korea's nuclear weapons would resume in beijing next week, the latest in a long series of negotiations that have failed to curb its nuclear program.  discussions are set to resume feb. 8 though the united states and north korea have not settled a dispute over freezing north korean assets at a bank in macau, a chinese territory.  united states treasury officials and their north korean counterparts met tuesday in beijing to discuss american measures that have led to the freezing of $24 million in north korean assets held at the bank, banco delta asia. no breakthrough appeared imminent, but the talks were set to continue wednesday.  the dispute overshadowed the last round of nuclear negotiations, which ended in a stalemate in december. whether north korea would bargain on its nuclear program while its money remained frozen was unclear.  the united states contends that the matter is separate from the nuclear issue and that the deposits are linked to north korean counterfeiting and money laundering.  north korea exploded a nuclear device in october, adding a sense of urgency to six-nation talks that have dragged on for more than three years without tangible progress.  many american and chinese analysts say they doubt north korea will give up its nuclear arms voluntarily after spending decades working to buy and develop the technology.  but the analysts also say that the bush administration and the north korean leader, kim jong-il, may have more to gain by continuing the talks than abandoning them, at least partly because china, the key intermediary, insists that the talks are the only way to proceed.  the united states and china agreed to impose limited united nations military sanctions on north korea after its nuclear test. but china has opposed tougher penalties on north korea, its former ally.  christopher r. hill, an assistant secretary of state and the chief american envoy at the talks, says the north koreans have signaled their commitment to a 2005 accord on dismantling their arms program. he met his north korean counterpart, kim kye-gwan, in berlin this month, and both sides said they had set the stage for a productive round.  