the world's a mess, and it's all your fault   warning: your reading of this newspaper may be hazardous to someone's health. (don't worry -- not yours.) equally fraught with danger is the casual reach for that morning coffee, the purchase of a new pashmina, a night out at the theater.  in ''the fever,'' his corrosive exercise in theatrical conscience-baiting, wallace shawn argues that virtually every transaction undertaken by an american city-dweller rests on a sturdy foundation of moral turpitude. going about our everyday business -- hailing a taxi, scoring a reservation at a hot restaurant, taking a nice write-off for a donation to the opera -- we are condemning unseen victims in violence-ridden third world countries to lives of want and suffering.  so put down that venti latte, for heaven's sake.  mr. shawn previously performed this 90-minute monologue in private readings, beginning in 1990. although it later moved on to less exclusive runs at various theaters in new york and abroad, ''the fever'' essentially and inevitably became a high-end cultural product in its own right, much as mr. shawn's similarly themed ''designated mourner'' did a decade later in london and new york.  mr. shawn has amusingly chosen to acknowledge this paradox in the new production that opened last night at the acorn theater, directed by scott elliott for the new group. the evening begins with a champagne reception (pommery, no less) held on the stage a half-hour before showtime. mr. shawn can be seen mingling with hoi polloi, the dome of his bald head bobbing genially as he exchanges chitchat with audience members. (at the reviewed performance, not-so-hoi polloi gathering onstage included the novelist william kennedy, the playwright tina howe and the actor ethan hawke.)  think twice before you reach for that flute, however, since mr. shawn's aim is to make you regret every sip by inducing a bout of moral indigestion. ''the fever'' offers an intimate tour of the tortured consciousness of an angst-ridden, well-to-do american, but mr. shawn's real goal is to hold an unflattering mirror up to his well-meaning, liberally inclined audience. it's sort of like joseph conrad's ''heart of darkness,'' with you, dear viewer, cast in the distasteful role of kurtz.  but mr. shawn's literary models are more likely kafka and dostoyevsky, and at its best, ''the fever'' does achieve the hypnotic force of those explorers of the uncanny. the hallucinatory narrative circles back to a traumatic night spent in a hotel room in an unnamed country riven by civil war. racked with fever, the narrator replays in his mind's eye a disturbing reel of memories from his past life. shivering on the floor of the bathroom, as scary bugs crawl around him, he is drawn into an anguished recognition of the interior drives -- and the brutal economic order -- that have supported his obliviously contented, guilt-free existence. his diagnosis: a severe case of self-interest abetted by self-justification, with a smidgen of self-delusion on top.  mr. shawn recounts this tale from a cozy berth in a comfortable armchair, a setting that neatly telegraphs the ultimate destination of this moral adventurer. he is framed by a truncated slice of a handsome apartment (the set is by derek mclane), and as the monologue shifts tones, from aggrieved to inquisitive to angered, jennifer tipton's lighting moves across its own spectrum, from stark to shadowy to cozy. mr. shawn's distinctive voice -- it is as if a clogged sinus is speaking directly to us -- also ranges in tone, from soft, babyish lament to a choked cry of outrage.  for the narrator of ''the fever'' doesn't travel a smooth path from benighted indifference to human suffering toward committed engagement in fighting the good fights. he eventually shifts from spasms of contrition for his part in the world's injustices to coolly logical arguments for maintaining the status quo. regarding the violence and squalor of the countries he visits, he wavers between sympathy and discomfort, compassion and repulsion.  the strength of ''the fever'' lies in the slippery grasp the narrator has on his own convictions, as mr. shawn captures with impish wit the tortuous reasoning of a mind trying to find its way back to acceptance of a state of affairs it has discovered to be morally untenable. mr. shawn exposes the contradictions and compromises of the urban liberal mind with a mercilessness that is sly and at times hilarious.  despite the density and richness of its language, however, ''the fever'' doesn't go very deep in its analysis of the fundamental causes of the world's inequities or posit any rational ideas about how they could be eased. mr. shawn is limited by the scope of the narrator's experience, of course -- an economist or political scientist he is not -- but the resulting narrative circles around a few basic conclusions that seem thinner and more obvious the more they are illustrated or simply repeated.  ''my feeling in my heart a sympathy for the poor does not change the life of the poor,'' our narrator unsurprisingly says toward the play's conclusion. at least mr. shawn displays a self-knowledge to match his narrator's when he has him continue, ''and artists who create works of art that inspire sympathy and good values don't change the life of the poor.''  the play's damning conclusion -- that only blood spilled on their doorsteps will bring the complacent rich to change their selfish ways -- allows no wiggle room for incremental but steady progress in alleviating the world's grievous economic imbalances. its simple finger-pointing at the egoism and materialism of the complacent bourgeoisie seems reductive.  more to the point, i think mr. shawn overestimates his audience's taste for self-flagellation by a good half-hour. ''the fever'' would cut deeper into the consciousness if it were shorter. he should know that a 90-minute monologue gives too much rein for straying thoughts about dinner plans and how best to catch a taxi after the performance.  and perhaps -- who knows? -- a few audience members might put that half-hour to better use, studying or working for gradual improvements in the lives of others rather than lamenting their own egoism over glasses of champagne.  the fever  by wallace shawn; directed by scott elliott; sets by derek mclane; costumes by eric becker; lighting by jennifer tipton; sound by bruce odland; production supervisor, peter r. feuchtwanger/prf productions; production stage manager, valerie a. peterson; managing producer, barrack evans; associate artistic director, ian morgan. presented by the new group, mr. elliott, artistic director; geoff rich, executive director. at the new group at theater row, acorn theater, 410 west 42nd street, clinton, (212) 279-4200. through march 3. running time: 1 hour 30 minutes.  with: wallace shawn (the traveler).  theater review  