spotting freelancer conflicts: a solution with problems   the ability of the new york times to maintain its ethical standards among its far-flung outside contributors continues to be a major concern of mine. as these freelancers fill column after column at a lower cost than full-time reporters, readers have a right to expect that editors ensure the integrity of that journalism.  but embarrassing gaps continue to beset the times's online ethics questionnaire, introduced last april to ascertain whether freelancers meet the paper's fundamental ethical standards before they get assignments. recently, articles by two freelancers suffered from clear conflicts of interest, first spotted by readers who wrote to me.  brief, upbeat reports written by a frequent times freelancer about two cellphones made by samsung appeared nov. 23 and 30. then, on dec. 7, an editors' note acknowledged that the author had made an october visit to samsung's south korean offices at the company's expense.  an oct. 15 article on the use of environmentally sensitive building methods and materials featured an oregon home that was the first in the western united states to receive a special certification for ''green'' houses. an editors' note on oct. 29 disclosed that the freelance author was employed part time as an editor and writer by a nonprofit organization that promotes a sustainable economy, and that had received financial contributions from the owner of the home.  if times editors had been aware of the conflicts, both editors' notes concluded, the two freelancers would not have been given the assignments. but why, i began to ask senior editors after the second note appeared, had the new online ethics questionnaire failed to detect these conflicts?  as i continued to pursue these questions, the problem was acknowledged in a jan. 16 memo to the staff from craig r. whitney and william e. schmidt, both assistant managing editors. ''recently, we've seen several cases of freelancers' apparent unfamiliarity with provisions of the ethical journalism policy  despite the vetting system we put in place last spring to try to ensure that they would be aware of the policy,'' they wrote.  in a push in the right direction, the memo requires editors to ask freelancers if they are ''familiar with our ethics rules'' the next time each is given an assignment -- and to ''make it clear that continuing to contribute to the times depends on observing those rules.'' if a freelancer ''deliberately disregards'' the paper's ethical journalism guidelines, ''we stop giving assignments to that person,'' the two editors warned.  so how did the freelancer conflicts on these stories escape detection before publication?  the freelancer who took the samsung junket, john biggs, had responded to the online ethics questionnaire for outside contributors in may, shortly after it became a requirement. ''have you accepted any free trips, junkets or press trips in the last two years?'' one question asked. his negative response was accurate at that time, according to mr. whitney, who is also the paper's standards editor.  after taking the october junket, primarily to write for crunchgear.com, a blog about electronic gear, mr. biggs told me, he ''simply forgot'' about updating his ethics questionnaire response so times editors would be aware of his conflict of interest and not assign him any samsung stories. his editor doesn't share his vague recollection that he mentioned samsung's role in his trip. in any case, comments he posted on crunchgear on oct. 17, the day he arrived in seoul, make it clear to me that he understood the unethical aspect of junkets. ''i'm here with samsung,'' he wrote, ''suckling on the sweet teat of junket whoredom.''  unfortunately, the times's online ethics questionnaire system requires updating of freelancer responses only every two years. mr. biggs, who in recent months has been writing brief articles almost every week for the business section, wasn't asked to update his responses before writing the two stories about samsung products in november.  the writer of the article lauding the oregon builder's ''green'' house, colleen kaleda, had also responded to the ethics questionnaire in may. asked to list her current employers, ''whether full time or part time,'' she omitted the sightline institute, where she did editing and writing and was then listed as the ''associate editor'' of tidepool, its online news service. ms. kaleda told me that she hadn't listed sightline as a part-time employer because of ''the small amount of work involved.'' she has told times editors that she wasn't aware when she quoted him in the article that the home's owner had donated to sightline.  a times editor reviewed ms. kaleda's may responses when he assigned her the article for the real estate section in late summer. i think it's likely that correctly listing her work for sightline would have raised enough questions to bring to light the nonprofit's focus on a sustainable economy and the donations from the owner of the featured home. but ms. kaleda's listing of her volunteer work for the oregon league of conservation voters should have also triggered questions from her editor, and it didn't.  before issuing the new warning about deliberately disregarding the paper's ethics rules, mr. whitney had ruled that there should be minimal restrictions on the two freelancers. mr. biggs, he determined, is not eligible for any assignments about samsung products, and ms. kaleda is not to be assigned articles about environmental issues.  most freelancers, it's important to note, follow the paper's guidelines and deliver valuable articles to readers of the times. and full-time news staffers don't always adhere to the paper's ethical standards. as some outside contributors were quick to remind me when i first called for stronger editing and ethical oversight for them, jayson blair was not a freelancer. but the number of freelancers in the paper's database -- more than 5,000 -- and the specter of conflicts raised by their work outside the times create issues that demand comprehensive and diligent oversight.  the tales of these two freelancers convinced me that readers deserve to have more attention paid to the ethics of outside contributors than the latest memo provides. a key need: an editing staff sufficient to allow extra time to question freelancers and edit their stories. but there are at least two inexpensive changes to the existing online vetting system that could give editors more updated information and increase the pressure on outside contributors to read its ethical rules.  each assignment should require that the freelancer has responded to the online ethics questionnaire within the previous 30 days; the two-year interval is useless. and there should be an additional ''question'' that confirms the reading, or rereading, that day of the 686 words of the complete freelancer ethics rules already posted online underneath the questionnaire; that would make pleading ignorance difficult.  these changes wouldn't prevent all problems. but they would provide additional protection for the paper's credibility that is sorely needed.  drawing a line  times editors have carefully made clear their disapproval of the expression of a personal opinion about iraq on national television by the paper's chief military correspondent, michael gordon.  the rumored military buildup in iraq was a hot topic on the jan. 8 ''charlie rose'' show, and the host asked mr. gordon if he believed ''victory is within our grasp.'' the transcript of mr. gordon's response, which he stressed was ''purely personal,'' includes these comments:  ''so i think, you know, as a purely personal view, i think it's worth it [sic] one last effort for sure to try to get this right, because my personal view is we've never really tried to win. we've simply been managing our way to defeat. and i think that if it's done right, i think that there is the chance to accomplish something.''  i raised reader concerns about mr. gordon's voicing of personal opinions with top editors, and received a response from philip taubman, the washington bureau chief. after noting that mr. gordon has ''long been mindful and respectful of the line between analysis and opinion in his television appearances,'' mr. taubman went on to draw the line in this case.  ''i would agree with you that he stepped over the line on the 'charlie rose' show. i have discussed the appearances with michael and i am satisfied that the comments on the rose show were an aberration. they were a poorly worded shorthand for some analytical points about the military and political situation in baghdad that michael has made in the newspaper in a more nuanced and unopinionated way. he agrees his comments on the show went too far.''  it's a line drawn correctly by mr. taubman -- and accepted honorably by mr. gordon.  the public editor  