news summary   international 3-12  saudi arabia shifts oil policy  saudi arabia, which benefited from record oil prices last year, has sent signals in the past two weeks that it is committed to keeping oil at around $50 a barrel -- down $27 a barrel from the summer peak that shook consumers.  1  attacks on shiites continue  shiite neighborhoods in baghdad came under attack once again, the 10th consecutive day of large scale bloodshed, as bombings and shootings left at least 300 people dead and roughly 1,000 wounded in the past two weeks.  4  u.s. debate on israeli bombs  the bush administration will inform congress that israel may have violated agreements with the united states when it fired american-supplied cluster munitions into southern lebanon during its fight with hezbollah last summer, officials said.  3  3 killed in gaza violence  at least three more palestinians were killed in gaza in continuing battles between fighters loyal to fatah and hamas, which has been celebrating the anniversary of its victory a year ago over fatah in legislative elections.  3  bomb kills pakistani police  at least 14 people were killed, most of them policemen, and several others were wounded in what appeared to be a suicide bombing in the northwestern city of peshawar, the police said.  4  national 14-22  obama's years at harvard law  harvard law school was the place where barack obama, the illinois senator now running for the presidency, first became a political sensation and emerged as the polished public figure he is today.  1  dispute over singer's burial  more than a month after the death of james brown, the singer's body has still not been laid to rest because of a financial dispute.  14  early campaigning  senator hillary rodham clinton visited iowa, beginning her campaign to become the nation's first female president. in new hampshire, rudolph w. giuliani sounded nearer than ever to being a presidential candidate. 16  antiwar protest in capital  tens of thousands of protesters converged on the national mall to oppose president bush's plan for a troop increase in iraq.  21  new york/region 25-29  redistribution helps casinos  new jersey's casino reinvestment development authority was created to capture gambling revenue and redirect it to blighted areas. but the agency has handed about $400 million back to the casinos themselves. 1  last days of pfizer enclave  the pfizer company is set to close its brooklyn location after 157 years as an industrial magnet and benefactor. the company's imminent departure will mean more than the loss of 600 jobs. 25  chess 29  weather 30  