arts, briefly   novelty rules the box office  three new movies elbowed their way into the top five at the nation's box office this weekend. the three, ''epic movie'' (fox), ''smokin' aces'' (universal) and ''catch and release'' (sony), helped tumble ''stomp the yard'' (sony) into fifth place after two weeks as no. 1, ''dreamgirls'' (paramount) to sixth from third and ''the pursuit of happyness'' (sony) to seventh from fifth. only ''night at the museum'' (fox) managed to survive the quest for novelty, holding second place and taking in $14.5 million for a total of $216.7 million in six weeks in release, according to the box-office tracking company screenline. ''epic movie,'' a parody of recent popular films (at right, rico rodriguez torturing kal penn) was the weekend's no. 1 attraction, grossing $19.2 million. the bloody action film ''smokin' aces'' finished third with $14.2 million, and fourth place went to the romantic comedy ''catch and release,'' starring jennifer garner, which made $8 million. ''stomp the yard'' took in $7.8 million.  sundance festival winners  for a second consecutive year, a story about a mexican immigrant has won the sundance film festival's grand jury prize for best american drama, the associated press reported from park city, utah. following ''quinceañera'' last year, this year's winner was ''padre nuestro,'' written and directed by christopher zalla in his debut. his film tells of a mexican teenager (jorge adrián espindola, shown below with paola mendoza) who sneaks into the united states to find the father he never met, only to have his identity stolen by a fellow illegal immigrant. the grand jury award in the united states documentary competition went to jason kohn's ''manda bala'' (''send a bullet''), about government corruption and kidnapping in brazil; and the audience award for favorite united states drama went to ''grace is gone,'' starring john cusack as a father who takes his young daughters on a road trip to postpone telling them that their mother, an army sergeant, has been killed in iraq. the film's writer-director, james c. strouse, also won the waldo salt screenwriting award.  j.lo en español  jennifer lopez is to release her first spanish-language album in april in a venture linked to a mini-series that will be based on its content, billboard.com reported. titled ''como ama una mujer'' (''how a woman loves'') and written and produced by ms. lopez's husband, marc anthony, in collaboration with estefano and julio reyes, the album, on the epic label, will be in stores on april 3. billboard reported that under a pending deal with the univision television network, a treatment by ms. lopez, based on the songs, would lead to a five-part television series. ms. lopez would not act in the programs but would perform a track at the end of each episode.  b. b. king feels 'fabulous'  the grammy-winning bluesman b. b. king, 81, right, was released from a hospital in galveston, tex., on saturday after having been treated since thursday for fever related to a bout with the flu, the associated press reported. a spokeswoman, tina france, said he was ''feeling fabulous'' and intended to perform tomorrow in fort worth.  a symphony postponed  the pulitzer prize-winning composer john adams has delayed the premiere of his ''doctor atomic symphony,'' having found it ''a much more time-consuming project than originally anticipated,'' the associated press reported. the symphony, based on his opera about the development of the atomic bomb, was commissioned by the st. louis symphony, the bbc and carnegie hall. it was to have been performed at carnegie hall on march 31, but mr. adams said it would not be ready. carnegie hall said it would be replaced by mr. adams's ''harmonielehre'' in a concert by the st. louis symphony, led by david robertson.  jacob's pillow at 75  the jacob's pillow dance festival will celebrate its 75th anniversary from june 16 through aug. 26 with performances by 20 companies from 4 continents and 10 countries, as well as classes, talks and exhibitions, in becket, mass., the company announced. the programs include at least three world premieres and six american premieres.  in ceremonies at sadler's wells theater in london, the royal ballet received three critics' circle national dance awards last week when carlos acosta was named best male dancer, miyako yoshida best female dancer and steven mcrae best emerging male artist (classical). the bolshoi ballet took two awards, including best classical choreography for ''the bright stream'' by the company's artistic director, alexei ratmansky, and best foreign dance company. the company prizes for outstanding repertory went to the phoenix dance theater for modern works and the all-male ballets trockadero de monte carlo for classical works.  a new museum for lisbon  beginning in july, lisbon will have a major museum of modern art, housing a collection of works by picasso, warhol, dalí, miró, francis bacon and others that was valued last year by christie's at $410 million, agence france-presse reported. with examples from the principal artistic movements of the 20th century, the museum will display the 862 works of the collection of josé berardo, a 62-year-old billionaire who made his fortune in mining in south africa. ''bits of the collection have been shown to the public before, but we are going to showcase it all for the first time,'' said the french historian jean-françois chougnet, who will be the museum's director. after a decade of wrangling, the portuguese government and mr. berardo reached agreement on the display of his entire collection, which will be seen in the state-run belem cultural center not far from a monastery that houses the tombs of portugal's kings and queens. the government hopes that the new museum will attract affluent art-loving tourists to portugal.  from greece's royalty  over the objections of the greek culture minister, george voulgarakis, christie's in london held a two-day sale last week that featured silver and fabergé from the summer palace of king george i, who ruled greece from 1863 to 1913; it fetched $18.4 million. the total was six times the presale estimate for the more than 850 items in the collection, christie's announced, adding that everything was sold. mr. voulgarakis had called upon christie's to cancel the sale until it proved that the artworks were legally exported. christie's refused, saying that the greek government had been ''well aware'' of the auction since last year and that mr. voulgarakis had told the greek parliament on jan. 3 that the export ''was allowed.'' the seller was not identified.  a marxfest  symphony space's thalia film series will offer up the marx brothers' greatest hits, ''duck soup'' to ''horse feathers,'' from sunday until feb. 20 (left from top, chico, groucho and harpo). a complete schedule is available at symphonyspace.org.  