and i want to thank that same bunch. again.   as the awards season lumbers toward the oscars, you can almost envision what might happen when the academy awards are finally given out on feb. 25. forest whitaker will fumble for words and mumble; eddie murphy will robotically deliver his list of industry thanks; jennifer hudson will work in a hokey use of the word ''dream''; and helen mirren will pay tribute to the actual queen. because this season has already brought three televised awards shows without a single surprise in the acting categories, the winners' acceptance speeches have been hemmed in by an unusual problem: the same old people to thank and too many opportunities to do it.  this year's predictability adds a feeling of déjà vu to what was already a dismal situation. the acceptance speech is a weird hybrid, part private thanks to mom, dad and spouses, part professional thanks so agents and managers don't get mad, and part performance. but even as the shows have become more polished and star-laden, most winners maintain the silly illusion that they are addressing a room full of people and not a huge, fidgety television audience. the speeches have been especially repetitious at this year, as the same lines have ricocheted from the live golden globes on nbc two weeks ago to the broadcast film critics awards (announced before the globes but edited down to a choppy hour shown on e! on jan. 20th) and most recently the screen actors guild awards shown live on sunday on tnt and tbs. and with these four actors heavily favored to win oscars, what can we hope for?  mr. whitaker, the lead actor in ''the last king of scotland,'' started his speech to the broadcast critics with, ''wow -- wow,'' and apparently hasn't hired a speechwriter since. he ended with a halting list of thanks to his wife and kids, then: ''god. my ancestors.'' by the globes that had morphed into the more graceful, ''i want to thank god and the ancestors who let me stand on their shoulders every day,'' but he was fumbling again at the sag awards.  ms. hudson, who might as well be the only nominee for best supporting actress for ''dreamgirls,'' said at the golden globes, ''i have always dreamed but never ever this big,'' and told the broadcast critics, ''thank you all for being a part of my dream.'' by the sag awards she had stopped dreaming and even looked calm, which at least seems authentic. there's no point in any of these winners pretending to be surprised.  accepting his sag award for supporting actor in ''dreamgirls,'' mr. murphy finally made a stab at humor before launching into his deadly list from previous awards. the attempt was pretty lame, as he started with a half-baked british accent then said, ''i feel goofy'' next to all the eloquent british people in the room.  of course the british are often eloquent. while sweeping up awards for playing elizabeth ii in ''the queen,'' ms. mirren told the golden globes audience: ''i honestly think this award belongs to her. i think you fell in love with her.''  she echoed that at the sag awards (and repeated what she has said on talk shows) but pulled off the speech beautifully by adding a dash of wit. ''when i did my costume fittings for 'the queen,' i walked in and i saw those sensible shoes and those tweed skirts laid out in a row and i cried; i thought, i can't play anyone who chooses to wear those clothes,'' she said. but, she went on, ''i learned to love the person who chooses to wear those clothes, because i learned to love a person without vanity,'' but who has a great sense of discipline, duty and courage. she grasped what should be obvious. the trick to an acceptance is to cloak personal thanks -- because we in the audience truly do not care about the spouses and agents -- in an entertaining package.  that's the trick that made hugh laurie's acceptance at the golden globes an instant classic, as he mocked the absurdity of the awards cycle even while thanking everyone he had to as he picked up an award for his series ''house.'' it is odd that ''when people are falling over themselves to offer you free shoes and free cuff links and colonic irrigations for two, nobody offers you a free acceptance speech,'' he said. ''there just seems to be a gap in the market. i would love to pull out a speech by dolce and gabbana now.''  thanking his crew, he said: ''i know everyone says they have a wonderful crew. well, obviously that can't be the case. they can't all be wonderful. somebody somewhere is working with a crew of drunken thieves.''  even witty speeches need to be varied, though. if sacha baron cohen should win an oscar for best adapted screenplay for ''borat,'' it will be his third opportunity to make the same joke. ''thank you to every american in this room who has not sued us,'' he said when winning a globe for best actor in a comedy. the broadcast critics got the more inclusive, ''i want to thank everyone in america who decided not to sue us.'' maybe winners think that the relatively small audiences for cable shows makes repetition o.k. this year the globes reached more than 20 million people on nbc, and the broadcast critics only 887,000 on e! but every word endures in print and online, and will come back to haunt them.  whatever the misguided reason, this year's bland acceptances have accentuated the strangely cautious, apolitical mood that has struck the awards shows even in the midst of a war. choosing the namby-pamby ellen degeneres as oscar host is the most conspicuous symptom of that mood. maybe these winners have no political passions they want to share. but it's also true that actors from vanessa redgrave to sean penn have been criticized and often ridiculed for making political statements or grandiose speeches.  ''south park'' recently made george clooney's oscar acceptance from last year its target. in that episode smug attitudes can hover in the sky like smog, and a cloud of smug from mr. clooney's speech, praising hollywood for pioneering the civil rights battle, combines with a cloud of self-satisfaction from hybrid-car owners to create what the show calls a ''perfect storm'' of smugness. that's funny, but at least mr. clooney had something to say. and better a lecture than a laundry list.  film  