finding a cube, feeling like a 'rube'   relocating from san francisco, andrew wagner and heather bradley wagner had few requirements for their new new york home.  they wanted a one-bedroom apartment within walking distance of mr. wagner's office in soho that had ''enough space to let us coexist in our second year of marriage,'' mrs. wagner said.  ''there weren't a lot of deal breakers at the outset,'' she said. ''the one thing we didn't want was a high-rise with no character. we were looking for a place that had interesting history and wasn't generic.''  mr. wagner, 33, a founding editor of dwell magazine, was relocating to take a job as editor in chief of american craft, charged with reviving that 60-year-old magazine. mrs. wagner, 30, a freelance writer, contributes to the magazine domino.  the two, who are native californians, met through friends and married a year ago. she joined him in his two-bedroom, $1,200-a-month rental in pacific heights.  mrs. wagner was visiting new york in the fall for a relative's birthday celebration. so she extended her trip to hunt for a home -- an endeavor that, at that point, both thought would be enjoyable and exciting.  though mrs. wagner's sister, pamela bradley, lives on the upper east side, mrs. wagner stayed primarily with her sister's boyfriend, jack jarowicz. he lives in peter cooper village, which was much closer to the areas where she was hunting. and, unlike her sister, he had internet access at home.  with mr. wagner's new position, their budget allowed for $2,800 a month -- or $3,000 at the very most. compared with san francisco, ''we were going to be at the upper end; we were kind of high-rolling,'' he said.  in lower manhattan, however, it proved to be an awkward amount. one-bedrooms in that price range existed, but ''each place i looked at, i didn't want to stay a minute more than was polite,'' mrs. wagner said.  ''i was uncomfortable being in the spaces, which seemed to portend bad things to come,'' she said.  through friends, she heard of a $2,700 vacancy in chelsea. ''it was sort of subterranean,'' with a sorry-looking backyard ''walled in by buildings and dead plants,'' mrs. wagner said. the backyard didn't compensate for the small size. ''we can't live in a backyard!'' she exclaimed.  inside a second avenue place, she saw a ''frighteningly rickety loft-bed structure.'' outside a soho building, she was asked for spare change and offered drugs.  in the east village, she got the ''hard sell like i have never experienced in my life.'' the apartment was filled with sawdust and construction workers. only when she asked to see it again did she learn there were not, as she had been told, a dozen eager applicants. ''that was an eye opener,'' she said, the creation of fictional demand to rope you in.  ''i think i'm pretty resilient, but the hunt beat me down,'' she said. ''i was feeling pretty hopeless.''  her husband, wrapping up his work at dwell, tried to calm her over the phone. ''as the days went on, i heard her voice change from enthusiastic to tearful, tearful, tearful,'' he said. ''heather gets mad at me to this day. i have no concept of how terrible it was other than vicariously.''  they decided to take the first nice place she saw: a quaint one-bedroom, renting for $2,700 in a co-op building on a tree-lined west village street. the 450-square-foot apartment had little closet space, but came with basement storage.  the couple's sublease agreement was contingent upon approval of the co-op board. ''the broker kept saying, 'i'm sure you can do a phone interview; you are going to be fine,' '' mr. wagner said. when they were told they had to meet the board in person after all, they scheduled a date to do so and booked a moving company.  then came ''the most frustrating call i've ever received,'' mrs. wagner said. they had to fly out a week earlier to meet the board. they dropped everything to book a one-day trip.  with the emergence of so many glitches, they started to fear they would be rejected, ''but we had no other choice because that's where we had put all our eggs,'' mr. wagner said. if need be, the movers could haul their stuff to a storage facility in new jersey.  they anxiously searched craigslist, the web site, for a backup place and found an unusual listing: a 900-square-foot tribeca one-bedroom, with 14-foot ceilings, for $2,800 a month. the landlords, a married couple, replied quickly to their e-mail message. they often rented to artists and architects, like themselves, and kept the rent low so they had a good choice of tenants.  the wagners arranged to see the apartment during their one day in new york. it was ''rough around the edges,'' mr. wagner said, but had character galore. the centerpiece was a big white cube, originally a darkroom, with a sleeping area on top. the landlord had designed it himself three decades ago, when he bought the building, which may have once been a textile warehouse.  the wagners even knew one of the unit's previous occupants -- matthew baird, an architect. ''i love that cube,'' mr. baird said, calling it ''a great '70s omnibus space divider'' with a ''minimalist spirit.''  the wagners were offered a lease, though they felt bound to keep their appointment at the west village apartment, which mr. wagner had not yet seen.  when they asked to see the storage space at that apartment, they were told it contained the owner's stuff and wasn't available. that was the final indignity. they said ''thanks but no thanks'' to the board members, who ''were so nice it was like having tea at your grandmother's house,'' mrs. wagner said.  they rushed back to the tribeca building, signed the lease and called the movers, who were at their san francisco place, packing.  the west village broker later complained that they willfully defaulted on the lease, but took no action against them. ''no one said it was our apartment until we said we didn't want it,'' mr. wagner said. ''if it was our apartment, we never would have flown out here on a moment's notice and dropped $1,000 to come out here for just one day.''  their new apartment, big enough to fit much of their furniture and artwork, feels both expansive and homey. inside the cube is a small office and closet, where they plan to add a guest bed.  ''i feel kind of a rube because i am so obsessed with the story of this place,'' mr. wagner said, ''and now i realize every place in new york has a story like this.''  the hunt e-mail: thehunt@nytimes.com  