for hevesi prosecutor, 'one standard of justice'   p. david soares, the democratic district attorney here, has clashed at various points in his two years in office with the mayor, the police chief, the sheriff and the county legislature. he has assailed the war on drugs as a failure that ''provides law enforcement officials with lucrative jobs'' and called prison building an american ''economic development strategy.''  now mr. soares, 37, is taking on one of the most durable political machines in america: the elected officials of albany, where built-in incumbency and a ''pay-to-play'' system have created a culture in which at least 10 state lawmakers have been investigated, indicted or convicted in recent years.  while gov. eliot spitzer has been the most prominent voice calling for change, it was mr. soares who sent tremors through albany by pressuring former state comptroller alan g. hevesi, a fellow democrat, to plead guilty to a single felony charge and to resign last month. since then, mr. soares said his office has received numerous tips about wrongdoing in state government.  perhaps most worrisome for the capital: his efforts to look into corruption are now being aided by a partnership with attorney general andrew m. cuomo, creating what could be a potent check on legislative abuses in a newly reform-minded albany.  ''this historically has been an office that was very much a part of the local political establishment,'' mr. soares said recently about the albany prosecutor's office, which has jurisdiction over crimes in the capital. ''i come to this job with a certain independence and therefore i feel much more comfortable in looking at these cases.''  much of the groundwork for the hevesi case was laid out by the state ethics commission and the attorney general's office, but it was mr. soares (pronounced soars) who decided to pursue it as a felony investigation. mr. soares's predecessor, paul a. clyne, prosecuted high-profile cases, but the more notable, including cases against former assemblyman roger l. green and j. michael boxley, a former top assembly aide, ended with misdemeanor pleas.  the hevesi case reinforced mr. soares's pledge to bring ''one standard of justice'' to the office. although a democrat in a democratic-run county, he is also an outsider in a city led by older white men, a native portuguese speaker from cape verde, off the western coast of africa, who moved to pawtucket, r.i., at age 6. he graduated from cornell and then albany law school.  ''politically, my environment's a toxic environment, o.k.?'' mr. soares said in an interview. ''these are people that do not forget and have not forgotten.''  from a seafaring culture, he has decorated his office with images of sailboats. he has a fullback's build and dresses in conservative suits, but also wears a wristband with the word ''one'' on it, part of an antipoverty campaign popular with celebrities -- ''i'm a big u2, coldplay fan,'' he explained.  before his 2004 election, he was an obscure junior prosecutor frustrated with his former boss, mr. clyne. then he decided to do the unthinkable: run against his supervisor, and the local democratic machine.  he told mr. clyne he was going to run against him, which led to a seven-minute conversation, mr. soares said. ''first five, he laughed and didn't think to take me seriously, and the next two were firing me.''  mr. clyne, who now assists district attorneys in the state, declined to comment.  a bitter and expensive campaign followed. wealthy backers of drug law reform, including a group linked to the billionaire financier george soros, rallied support for mr. soares. that angered local politicians, including the longtime albany mayor, gerald d. jennings, who complained that interests from new york city were interfering in the election.  in a recent interview, mr. jennings said: ''i don't have a lot of contact with david. i expect him to do the job he was elected to do.''  his iconoclastic behavior as district attorney has certainly led some to see him as a hero ready to take on state government, while others see a zealous young prosecutor intent on making a name for himself.  relations with law enforcement officials frayed last year when mr. soares delivered a speech in canada highly critical of american drug policy, saying the war on drugs ''provides law enforcement officials with lucrative jobs'' -- a comment that he later apologized for making, while not backing off from the essence of his criticisms.  ''i took great offense at that,'' said james l. campbell, the albany county sheriff. ''i'm in my 41st year of law enforcement, 16 as sheriff, 24 with the state police, and i have had people i work side by side with killed in this war on drugs, so i really was offended by it, but he did apologize for it.''  his ability to take on corruption in state government was limited until recently. last year, he created a public integrity unit to pursue such cases, but he had only two lawyers and one investigator working both local and state matters. adding to his problems has been a feud with the county legislature, which recently tried to strip him of his investigator.  along came mr. cuomo, the new attorney general, who pledged to bolster the district attorney's efforts with lawyers and investigators from his much larger office. the deal has benefits for mr. cuomo as well -- giving his own office more teeth on such cases and access to criminal grand jury proceedings -- and a prosecutor with jurisdiction.  ''in opening the newspapers for the past several weeks, you see scandal after scandal involving state government,'' mr. cuomo said recently, adding that corruption cases were ''a higher priority than probably ever before.''  mr. soares said he was cautious about the hevesi case at first, because the initial complaint was delivered to his office by mr. hevesi's political opponent, j. christopher callaghan, with cameras in tow. but mr. hevesi's admissions that he had used state workers to chauffeur his wife, and scathing reports from the state ethics commission and the attorney general's office, provided a road map for conviction, and mr. soares insisted on a felony plea.  ''you had to ask yourself, if this was a guy who worked at dunkin' donuts, and this happened to a guy that worked at dunkin' donuts, what would we be doing?'' he said. ''and if the answer is he's got to plea to this charge, he's got to pay restitution, he's got to leave his job, then what's good for the guy at dunkin' donuts is also good for the state comptroller.''  in fact, mr. soares's entry into the political world similarly reflected more pedestrian concerns. the central issue in the 2004 race for district attorney was the rockefeller-era drug laws, which sent many drug offenders away to prison for decades.  mr. clyne was a vocal supporter of such laws, while mr. soares became an outspoken advocate of easing them and felt the district attorney's office eschewed alternatives to locking people up. he was assigned to be the community prosecutor -- essentially presenting a public face for the office -- but felt his efforts to reach out were undermined.  the roots of mr. soares's feelings on drug policy go back to his youth.  in pawtucket, his father worked as an electrician and carpenter. though he and his three sisters have done well, his older brother has struggled with drugs and crime.  ''he had brushes with the law as early as the age of 14, in and out of reform school, in and out of state prison,'' mr. soares said, adding, ''my mother had to be the lady in the audience watching her son be arraigned.''  eventually, his brother was deported.  ''i think what was frustrating for his family, and for david,'' said joao goncalves, a close friend of mr. soares's who also grew up in pawtucket, ''all the other siblings turned out just fine, but his brother was the bully in the neighborhood, he went down a different path.''  mr. soares, he said, ''sees the reality of people, and sees that there are some good people that make some really bad decisions and there are bad people that make some really bad decisions as well.''  perhaps the same can sometimes be said of politics. mr. soares seems intent on making his mark.  ''in the wake of our most recent state prosecution, i think more people are beginning to take note,'' he said. ''we do have tremendous jurisdiction and ability to help this governor with his reform agenda.''  