mobility was an early game plan for bears' tillman   charles tillman was born in chicago and plays for the bears. those bare facts of his life cover up the reality of his peripatetic existence. between kindergarten and 12th grade, tillman, whose father, donald, was a sergeant in the army, attended 11 schools.  tillman, perhaps not surprisingly, was among the more talkative bears during the news media session tuesday at dolphin stadium. his family moved so often that he eventually had to leave his shyness behind.  ''if you move all the time and you're real quiet, you probably won't make friends easy,'' said tillman, a fourth-year cornerback. ''you'll sit at home and be a loner. by us moving so much and traveling all the time, i had to get out there and make friends.''  to succeed in the secondary as tillman has, it is essential to be able to make adjustments on the run. tillman said his family's mobility was good training for his football career, because every time he enrolled at a new school there were gaps in his education that he had to close, like teaching himself long division.  ''it just made me get things quicker,'' he said. ''i'm a fast learner.''  tillman's curiosity led him to a book that ended up changing the way the bears' defense approached its job. tillman received ''212: the extra degree,'' written by s. l. parker and mac anderson, from a chicago-area businessman and embraced its premise.  ''at 211 degrees water is hot,'' he explained. ''at 212 degrees it boils. boiling water can become steam and steam can power a train. basically the extra degree makes all the difference in the world.''  tillman shared it with his teammates, and it became their unofficial playbook. ''the whole idea is that you've got to turn it up a notch,'' he said.  the secondary has done just that. led by tillman's 5 interceptions, the bears finished second in the n.f.l. with 24 interceptions during the regular season. they have 2 in the postseason.  jets hire secondary coach -- the jets hired mike macintyre to coach the secondary. macintyre, 41, spent the past four seasons as an assistant with the dallas cowboys.  he replaces corwin brown, who left earlier this month to become the defensive coordinator at notre dame.  indiana wants 2011 game -- mayor bart peterson, gov. mitch daniels and other business and community leaders planned a news conference today to discuss indianapolis's proposed bid for the 2011 super bowl.  the city has until april 2 to submit a bid. in 2008, the colts will move into lucas oil field, a retractable dome near their current rca dome home.  dallas and arizona are considered contenders for the 2011 game, and new orleans has shown some interest.  the super bowl has traveled north only three times in its 41-year history. indianapolis bid for the 1992 game, but lost to minneapolis. (ap)  cowboys and singletary meet -- the hall of fame linebacker mike singletary was the eighth and most likely the last candidate to be interviewed by the cowboys' owner and general manager, jerry jones, about replacing the retired bill parcells.  singletary was a late addition to the cowboys' coaching search. he did not get a call until after jones talked sunday to norv turner, the san francisco 49ers' offensive coordinator and former cowboys assistant, who is still viewed by many as a front-runner for the job.  the cowboys have not given a timetable for naming their new coach, but an announcement could come as early as today. (ap)  giants' sweatman retires -- the giants special-teams coordinator, mike sweatman, whose career included two super bowl victories with the team, announced his retirement yesterday. coach tom coughlin promoted tom quinn, sweatman's assistant this past season, to replace him.  sweatman, 60, was a giants assistant from 1985-92, and returned in 2004 when coughlin took over.  ''i just feel like it is time right now,'' said sweatman, who also coached for the jets, chicago, minnesota and new england. ''i'm sure i'm going to miss it. i'm going to miss the game. i'm going to miss the people that are a part of the game.'' (ap)  n.f.l. roundup  