4 killed in gas explosion near west virginia resort   an explosion at a store near a west virginia ski resort yesterday killed four people and injured five others, the authorities said.  the blast occurred just before 11 a.m. at the flat top little general store on route 19 in southern west virginia, shattering windows about a mile away and toppling a fire truck that had responded to the scene after a 911 call about a propane gas leak, fire officials said.  a local volunteer firefighter, a county building inspector and an emergency medical technician, all investigating the leak, were among the dead, whose names were not released, the police said.  investigators said they believed the blast was caused by gas that seeped into the store from a propane tank and ignited.  describing the gnarled wreckage at a news conference in ghent, a state fire marshal, sterling lewis, said, ''the best way to explain that for you is to imagine an explosion in your home and when you walk back up to your home the only thing that's left is toothpicks.''  ''i've lived here for 52 years,'' mr. lewis said. ''i passed that store every day and bought coffee for myself and cokes for the kids. when i pulled up and saw none of that store existing, i knew we had a problem.''  the store had two above-ground 500-pound propane tanks, but just the leaking gas, not the tanks themselves, seems to have exploded, mr. lewis said. the police said they would close route 19 for the rest of the night.  nora radford, who lives a few hundred yards south of the store on route 19, said she was thrown from a couch by the explosion.  ''i thought it was a tanker on the main road blew up or something,'' ms. radford said. ''everything was flattened. a couple of cars that i saw were flipped on their side, pretty much just scrap metal.''  ghent, about 70 miles south of charleston, sits on the edge of the winterplace ski resort.  residents more than a half mile away from the explosion compared the sound to a sonic boom or a tractor-trailer tire blowout.  ben monast, the manager of the ski shop, a half mile down the mountain from the store, said he was seated at his desk when he heard a boom and felt the concussion in his chest.  ''i thought we'd been hit by lightning,'' mr. monast said, adding that he immediately lifted his feet off the floor as an added precaution. ''the whole place shook pretty violently.''  gov. joe manchin iii arrived at the scene in the afternoon to console the families of the dead and injured.  ''this is a very difficult time for not only the families, but also for the first responders and the entire community of ghent,'' governor manchin said. ''i've been through too much of this in the last year, year and a half. there is a void that will never be filled.''  asked about his emotions after a year in which more than 20 coal miners died in accidents in west virginia, he said: ''you never get used to it. nor should you. everything has changed. parents lose a child. children don't have a parent now. but it's their faith, their faith in god that gets them through.''  by 4 p.m. yesterday, the flag at the volunteer fire department was at half staff.  ''i don't cry over things easily,'' said william manning, a bartender at the bear den, a nearby tavern, as his eyes filled with tears and turned red.  ''they're my best friends. i've known these people most of my life. you can't replace them.''  