where are they now?   where do former lawmakers end up after being voted out of office? teaching politics at local universities, it seems. and what happens to congressmen who have lost re-election primarily because of their ties to lobbyists? they are likely to be working for lobbyists. we look at the paths taken by politicians who lost some of the most contested races in 2006.  farhana hossain  colleges  lincoln chafee, rhode island republican  visiting fellow at the watson institute for international studies at brown university, where he will lead a study group on american foreign policy. after the election, mr. chafee said he was weighing leaving the republican party.  mike dewine, ohio republican  has accepted teaching positions at cedarville university and miami university in ohio.  harold e. ford jr., tennessee democrat  visiting professor at vanderbilt university, where he is teaching a seminar on american political leadership. last week, he was named chairman of the centrist democratic leadership council, whose past leaders include president bill clinton.  lobby firms  conrad burns, montana republican  a senior adviser for gage, a lobbying firm headed by his former chief of staff, leo giacometto. senate rules mandate that mr. burns wait two years before lobbying his former colleagues.  richard w. pombo, california republican  the president of pac/west communications, a lobbying firm based in oregon, told the capitol hill newspaper roll call that the company was in talks with mr. pombo.  research  rick santorum, pennsylvania republican  fellow at the center for ethics and public policy, a conservative research group. he will establish a program, called america's enemies, that creates awareness of the ''threats posed to america and the west from a growing array of anti-western forces,'' according to the center.  books  katherine harris, florida republican  u.s. news & world report quoted republican insiders as saying that she is writing a book.  mike sodrel, indiana republican  told bloomberg news this month that he planned to write a book to help people understand politics. ''the average person can't sit down and read john locke's second treatise on government,'' he said. ''i hope to distill it down into something relatively simple.''  political action: the defeated  