francis returns, and so do questions and doubts   steve francis reappeared at the knicks' training center monday morning, and for the second time in a year, he joined a team in disarray, with no clear sense of where or how -- or if -- he fits in.  the disarray is considerably milder than it was last february, when the knicks made the curious trade for francis. but his presence now, as it did then, could only complicate an already-muddled rotation.  coach isiah thomas recently demoted jared jeffries, his major off-season acquisition, to the bench. quentin richardson, who had shifted to shooting guard from small forward, is back at small forward, having replaced jeffries two games ago. jamal crawford, whose role seems to change weekly, appears to be a permanent starter again in the wake of jeffries's benching.  the knicks (19-27) are embroiled in another late-january swoon, having lost six of their past nine games, with another elite team -- the los angeles lakers (27-17) -- coming to madison square garden on tuesday. the knicks could end the night nine games under .500, which would be a low point in thomas's coaching tenure.  the return of francis is unlikely to change much, unless the knicks suddenly lose half their roster to injuries and suspensions again. francis has not played or practiced in four weeks, since taking his sore right knee to houston for rehabilitation.  he said that his leg was stronger now and that the knee no longer swelled up -- ''i'm feeling good'' -- but he began running again only last week. by his own estimation, he will not be ready to play for another two weeks.  francis was a starter on opening night and for 17 of the 21 games he played before tendinitis forced him out. but he has played in only three games since dec. 6, and other than a cameo role in their upset of detroit, he was absent for the knicks' best moments of the past two months: the overtime victories against utah and charlotte, the three-game winning streak in early january, the rout of miami last week.  the knicks' three best guards have been crawford, richardson and stephon marbury. francis, who was limited in practice monday, acknowledged, ''it's going to be hard'' to earn a major role, ''because guys are playing great at those positions.''  thomas was typically noncommittal on the subject, and he did not sound particularly enthusiastic about francis' return.  ''he practiced a little bit today, and we'll just see where it goes from here,'' thomas said. asked what francis was able to do at practice, thomas simply repeated, ''he practiced a little bit today.''  asked if he was happy to have francis back, thomas said yes. ''before he went down, he was playing good basketball for us,'' he said. ''and he's still steve francis.''  it just is not clear anymore what being steve francis means. his last all-star game appearance was only three years ago, but he has rarely looked like that player since coming to new york. coach larry brown pushed to acquire francis but hardly played him. thomas made francis a starter, but the francis-marbury backcourt played awkwardly and the team went 6-11. then came the knee troubles and the four-week trip to houston. francis is averaging 10 points and 4.1 assists this season.  thomas has established a rotation of eight to nine players but said of francis, ''if he's playing well, we definitely want him back.''  by the time francis plays, assuming he does, the knicks will have about 30 games left. francis would probably serve as the backup point guard the rest of the way, then look for a graceful exit -- and a starting job elsewhere -- over the summer.  if the knicks cannot trade francis -- and the $33.5 million he is owed the next two years makes it tough -- they will probably seek a contract buyout. team officials and francis' agent have denied reports that a buyout was already discussed.  ''that was never mentioned,'' francis said. ''i don't know where that came from.''  despite those reports, and the reasonable perception that he is unhappy here, francis again insisted that he wanted to play for the knicks.  ''it's hard when people assume so many different things,'' he said. ''when you're injured, you're injured. that's what it is. you can't really go out there and perform to your capability if you're injured. i just don't think that -- not saying people didn't believe me, but they didn't really give me a chance.''  francis clarified that he was not referring to the knicks.  ''they gave me enough time,'' he said. ''they told me whatever way i wanted to attack this thing that they're with me 100 percent.''  rebounds  quentin richardson will probably draw the first assignment of guarding the lakers' kobe bryant. but richardson is coping with some undisclosed health problems. he has scored only 12 points over the past four games.  the lakers have lost four of their past five games, their worst stretch this season, and are missing the injured starters kwame brown and luke walton. bryant is having another stellar season, averaging 28.4 points, 5.5 assists and 5.4 rebounds. but it is his leadership that most impresses isiah thomas. ''he's matured in this league as a person, and he's gotten tremendously better at leading, and understanding his teammates,'' thomas said. ''he appears to be more compassionate with his teammates, as opposed to the domineering, dominating, i'll-beat-you-up kind of person, which seems to be working with his teammates. because they're responding to that type of leadership.''  pro basketball  