the whole audience sits in one chair, the cast in the other   inspiration can come in the most unlikely places. for the writer and performer nancy bannon it arrived while she was riding in an elevator on the upper east side about five years ago. she was wearing grungy sweats and carrying a yoga mat when a dapper fellow in a business suit got on. she felt intimidated by his more formal attire; he looked uncomfortable as well, eyes darting as he pressed himself into a corner. both of them, she realized, were awkward in such a tiny space, and their responses turned the elevator ride into a miniature drama.  the power of proximity has tantalized ms. bannon ever since, which is why she created ''the pod project,'' a blend of theater and installation art that opens wednesday at the 20 greene gallery in soho. the idea is to have audience members experience one-on-one intimacy with actors. the performances take place in a dimly lighted room filled with 13 structures, or pods, covered in opaque plastic. the pods, which range from 8 to 12 feet high and 6 to 8 feet wide, each hold a single actor. one audience member enters each pod to watch an actor perform a three-minute play. silent ushers then guide viewers to the next structure.  each pod contains a unique world. some are realistic, like the kitchen in which an elderly jewish man welcomes his guest to sabbath dinner. others, like the snow globe featuring a waitress who plays wagner on the rims of wine glasses while wearing antlers and speaking german, are less so. ms. bannon -- whose husband, the tony-winning lighting designer brian macdevitt, is her primary collaborator on the project -- said some pods would not make sense until patrons interact with performers.  ''because it's a performance and there's this charged atmosphere, everybody's paying attention and finding meaning,'' ms. bannon said. referring to workshop performances, she continued, ''people come out and tell me, 'i saw she was blinking, and i think that she meant that for me.' ''  at a recent rehearsal i sat next to a man wearing a ski suit who completely ignored me during what was supposed to be a ride up a mountain on a ski lift. i became acutely aware of his movements so that every scratch of his face or rustle of his pants seemed to convey some hidden meaning.  ms. bannon sees great value in this enhanced sensitivity. ''if i can call attention to paying attention, then i find that very inspiring,'' she said. if, while on the street, ''i can be receptive like i am in those three minutes, i can see something beautiful,'' she added.  robert moss, the founder of the off broadway theater company playwrights horizons and current artistic director of syracuse stage, plays the grandfather who offers sabbath dinner. ''it's like a happening from the '60s, where the event would be that someone had stretched a piece of string on the sidewalk,'' he said in a telephone interview. ''if you walked and looked at the string, it made you look at the sidewalk in a different way. it was easy to be scornful, but if you went with it, it could affect you.''  ms. bannon recognizes of course that some viewers might feel uncomfortable in such a close setting. ''i really considered the potency of this private, one-to-one performance,'' she said. ''we very deliberately made the content not be confrontational and provocative. there are a few that are challenging, but it's not, 'i'm angry, and i want to show you what i'm mad about.' ''  each miniplay can vary from performance to performance. ms. bannon described how one play, in which a woman details her love life, tended to get interrupted by spectators spontaneously describing their own relationships. ''i haven't had stage fright in years, and i have a little bit now because it's so titillating,'' said tricia nelson, who plays the antler-wearing waitress. ''there's no escape. whatever happens, you're together.''  for mr. moss, part of his role is to reduce any possible discomfort. ''god forbid any of my friends should come,'' he said. ''but if a person is uncomfortable, my character can put them at their ease. i can talk to them like a grandpa.''  at one point the film star debra winger -- a friend and neighbor of ms. bannon and mr. macdevitt -- had planned to appear in a few performances as a second character who would enter a pod after a scene had begun. but ms. bannon said she decided the pods were more intensely intimate as one-on-one encounters.  with only 13 tickets available for each show during its two-week run, ''the pod project'' will not come close to covering its $20,000 cost. ms. bannon said the project was financed by contributions from friends; some of those involved are volunteering their time.  given the tight budget, ''one of the conceits has been taking very mundane materials and trying to make them elegant,'' mr. macdevitt said. ''it's like someone taking garbage from the street but having louis xvi's draper put it together.''  ''the skeletons of the pods are pipe we can rent from a lighting company,'' he continued. ''it would be really cool to carve these things out of wood, or if each one were blown glass. but maybe they will be in another incarnation.''  ms. bannon and mr. macdevitt are already planning future versions. they have been invited to transport the show to a friend's farm in amherst, mass., where the pods would look as if they were bursting out of the ground.  ''i'd love to do it in a field,'' ms. bannon said. ''i'd love to do it in a big, raw warehouse. that's right up my alley.''  theater  