senate to consider minimum wage bill with tax breaks   the senate is expected to clear the way on tuesday for an increase in the minimum wage that democrats and some republicans agree is overdue.  but the senate's approval may not mean that workers will actually start receiving bigger paychecks in the immediate future.  the senate bill differs from the one that cleared the house, and includes $8.3 billion in tax breaks for small businesses that republicans and some democrats say are necessary to offset the cost of the wage increase.  the house bill, which passed by a vote of 315 to 116, with 82 republicans joining the democrats, included none of those tax breaks. and democratic leaders there have said they want to hold out for that kind of ''clean'' bill.  the question is how the leaders in both houses choose to reconcile the two approaches.  the first senate vote will be on whether to limit debate on the measure, leading to a second vote -- and expected approval -- later this week.  then, the senate could hold on to the bill, leaving it to leaders from both chambers to work out the differences. or, it could send the bill to the house, where the house could strip out the tax breaks and send it back to the senate for a new vote.  aides to some house leaders say they would be willing to allow some of the tax breaks. but others, including representative charles b. rangel, democrat of new york and the chairman of the ways and means committee, are insisting that they will not concede any tax cuts.  house democrats say that by forcing a vote on a clean bill they would force senate republicans to put themselves on record as opposing a wage increase, which was a popular campaign issue in the midterm elections.  ''we are still operating on the assumption or hope that the senate will pass a clean minimum wage bill,'' said stacey f. bernards, a spokeswoman for representative steny h. hoyer of maryland, the democratic leader. ''if it doesn't happen, it's because a minority of republicans held it up. it's their fault.''  that simple approach to raising the minimum wage failed in the senate last week. sixty votes were required to cut off debate on the bill, sending it for a vote, but democrats were able to enlist just five republicans, for a vote of 54 to 43.  ''the only way we're going to get a minimum wage increase through the senate is if it is accompanied by tax breaks for small businesses,'' said jim manley, a spokesman for senator harry reid of nevada, the democratic leader. ''i haven't seen a diminution of the opposition.''  senator charles e. schumer of new york, the no. 3 democrat in the senate, said he believed the senate might go along if the house sent back a bill stripped of the tax breaks. ''this is good cover for the republicans,'' he said. ''they're saying, 'i'm not against a minimum wage increase, i just want tax breaks for small businesses.'  ''but when the choice is yes or no because the house did something out of our control,'' he added, ''i think we'll get more of them on our side.''  senator edward m. kennedy, the massachusetts democrat who has been the chief proponent of the measure, has hammered republicans almost daily, accusing them of trying to stall the bill with amendments. ''it's always baffling to me what do republicans have against hard-working americans?'' he said monday.  the bill would raise the federal minimum wage $2.10 an hour over two years, from $5.15 to $7.25, and would be the first increase since 1996.  among the tax breaks would be a five-year extension of the credit provided to employers who hire people who have traditionally had trouble finding jobs, as well as a tax credit for hiring veterans disabled in afghanistan and iraq after the 9/11 attacks; an extension through march 31, 2008, of a provision that allows businesses to deduct the cost of improvements to leased properties more quickly; and a permanent change to the tax code allowing small businesses to use the cash method of accounting.  the senate committee on finance, which approved the small business tax breaks in the package being voted on, said the cuts would be covered by closing tax loopholes for companies and executives.  