meissner slips but holds off hughes for u.s. title   her long program saturday was not the triumphant performance kimmie meissner had hoped for, but after holding on to win the women's title at the united states figure skating championships, she could not stand still. she bounced in place, shifted from one skate to the other and clasped her hands to keep them still. she could not stop smiling.  with a narrow victory over a shaky field, meissner, 17, captured her first national title, a year after her surprising victory at the world championships.  ''it's really neat,'' said meissner, who defeated emily hughes by less than a point, 181.68 to 180.86. ''i was just getting used to the world champion thing and now this is going to be a new one. i'm really excited.''  as meissner battled her nervous energy, she understood that she had not swept away the field, which was missing the sport's biggest names, michelle kwan and sasha cohen. neither has officially retired, but kwan and cohen sat out this season to contemplate their futures.  in their absence, meissner became the clear favorite, armed with her world title and a technically superior program. but meissner had to hold off hughes, whose fall on a triple flip probably kept her from winning. alissa czisny, 19, won the long program with 119.59 points, but because she was fifth after the short program thursday night, she was able to move only as high as third.  hughes, who turned 18 on friday, said she understood how close she had come to winning this title, something her sister sarah, the 2002 olympic gold medalist, never did. ''i am aware,'' she said, ''and it is going to push me until march.''  that is when meissner, hughes and czisny will compete as the united states women's team at the world championships in tokyo against a strong field of japanese contenders, including the 16-year-old sensation mao asada.  by then, meissner hopes to have a triple axel back in her program. she has not landed one since the 2005 nationals, when she became the first woman to accomplish the feat since tonya harding in 1991.  ''we think about it every day,'' meissner's coach, pam gregory, said. ''she practices it every day. it's just a matter of what the odds are. it can't be something that just comes together at the end. i know kimmie, and consistency is the name of the game for her, and that's what allows her to be a good competitor.''  that consistency is why meissner was surprised at her stumbles in the long program. on her first jump, which was supposed to be a triple-triple combination, she put her hand down on the landing of the triple lutz and went without the combination. she later wobbled on the landing of a combination. ''of course i would have liked to have won the long program, but i'm happy over all,'' meissner said. ''i'm glad i did a good short and i did a pretty good long. not perfect, but pretty good.''  czisny skated first in the final group saturday and put on a spectacular performance, landing all of her jumps and capitalizing on her strength, her mesmerizing spins. a year ago, czisny came to nationals believing she was a contender for the olympic team, but she faltered, finishing seventh.  ''after last year i was so disappointed, so just coming back this year and skating well, i was really, really happy,'' czisny said.  meissner's performance left the door open for hughes. but midway through hughes's program, she fell on a triple flip, a jump she says she has struggled with recently.  ''i really wanted to skate a clean long program,'' she said. ''but what i've learned over the past year is, i learned to get up and keep going.''  hughes had been in the lead at the cup of china after the short program, only to falter in the long and fall to third. at skate america, she failed to attempt several of her jumps in the long program and fell out of contention.  meissner's stumbles this season have generally come in the short program, so she was relieved when she came out of that cleanly and holding a strong lead. she needed every bit of it.  now that meissner has a national title to go with her world championship, she plans to share the news with her classmates at fallston high school in bel air, md., when she returns to classes tuesday.  she can tell them over the intercom because she is the student who makes the announcements.  meissner said she would say: ''kimmie meissner is back in the building today after winning nationals, so make sure that when you see her you tell her congratulations. and this is kimmie.''  with that, meissner laughed and bounced along on her way to collect her champion's medal.  lysacek takes men's title -- evan lysacek won his first national title saturday after finishing second and third the past two years. although lysacek has placed ahead of johnny weir in recent international competitions, he has been unable to top weir, who had won the last three titles, at the nationals. ryan bradley finished second, and weir third.  lysacek landed the first quad jump of his career in the competition, doing a quad toe loop-triple toe loop combination on the first jump of his program. he also completed eight triple jumps, all cleanly.  italian wins european title -- carolina kostner landed six triple jumps to become the first italian to win the women's title saturday at the european figure skating championships in warsaw. (ap)  winter sports  