with gold in reach, jacobellis falls again   in a stunning repeat of her performance at the winter olympics, lindsey jacobellis had to settle for a silver medal saturday after falling just before the finish during the snowboarder x final at the winter x games.  jacobellis led most of the way down the winding, jump-filled x games course but lost her balance and flailed her arms while soaring over the final jump. upon landing, she caught her heel edge and cartwheeled across the finish line, but not before joanie anderson passed her for the gold medal.  the gift from jacobellis left anderson thrilled. ''i'm so stoked and shocked,'' anderson said.  it was reminiscent of the olympic snowboardcross final in turin, italy, last year. snowboardcross was a new event at the 2006 olympics, and jacobellis was favored to win its first gold medal.  but with a commanding lead in the olympic final, jacobellis celebrated early on the course's penultimate jump by pulling a stylish move called a method air; she grabbed her board's heel edge and tweaked it 75 degrees.  she caught an edge on the landing and spun on her back, allowing tanja frieden of switzerland to pass her for the gold medal.  at first jacobellis said her move was an attempt to stabilize her ride, but she later admitted she was just trying to have fun. questions about her fall continued during the run-up to the x games. and jacobellis made it clear she was tired of them. during a recent interview, she said of the olympic incident, ''it was just kind of a fluke thing that happened.''  jacobellis has been the dominant performer in women's snowboardcross. she had not lost in the past three x games in which she competed, from 2003 to 2005. two weeks ago in arona, switzerland, she won her second consecutive world championship.  but with her latest tumble, jacobellis has earned a reputation for blunders on her sport's biggest stages.  it has been a difficult week for jacobellis, who declined to talk to reporters after saturday's mishap. she sustained a concussion after a fall thursday night during practice for the women's superpipe. she withdrew from the event but showed no lingering effects saturday in racing to an early lead among the six riders in the snowboarder x final.  half the field, including frieden, wiped out earlier in the final on an upper portion of the course, making it a three-way race between jacobellis, anderson and maelle ricker.  winter x games  