neighborhood report: reading new york   by most benchmarks, nicky barnes ought to be dead by now.  when he was born, the average life expectancy for a black man in america was less than 50 years. before he turned 10, he had a robbery arrest under his belt. he later served hard time at green haven state prison. when he was released in 1998, he resumed his high-risk, high-profile career -- drug dealing.  tales from mr. untouchable, and a stroll among the statues  he was a target of murderous rivals and dogged federal investigators (supposedly on jimmy carter's personal orders, after a natty photograph of mr. barnes appeared on the cover of the new york times magazine next to the headline ''mr. untouchable'').  finally, after returning to prison, he felt forsaken by his friends. so he ratted them out.  but instead of being dead, nicky barnes has written a book.  it's hard to imagine harlem's most notorious heroin peddler still alive at the age of 74, much less reminiscing, à la steve martin as the urban mobster transplanted to suburbia in ''my blue heaven.''  but in fact mr. barnes now lives under a pseudonym in a retreat provided courtesy of the federal witness protection program. there, presumably, he can still fulfill his entrepreneurial urges by pursuing career goals that, we learn, have included operating a chain of automated car washes and marketing something called a flake-burger made from remnants of butchered beef (he once rejected an associate's offer to steal recipes from the parks sausage company; ''as a muslim,'' he says dryly, ''i didn't eat pork, so that didn't interest me'').  ''mr. untouchable'' (rugged land, $24.95), written with tom folsom, a documentary film producer, offers a very raw, inside (and, by its nature, one-sided), video-game-paced view of how leroy (nicky) barnes's ''council'' of drug dealers thrived, collaborated with the mafia, laundered money and invested in legitimate businesses. and it reveals how mr. barnes finally was persuaded by canny federal investigators and prosecutors to exact revenge on his wayward former associates.  because there is no statute of limitations, he volunteers no leads on unsolved murders. he says he omitted some details ''to prevent anyone else from getting killed.'' he also offers few new insights into how he corrupted and evaded cops (''our surveillance was better,'' he writes). and we're left wondering what happened to his children, who were placed in some form of foster care after he cooperated.  for an author whose reading list has included ''the prince'' and ''roots,'' mr. barnes sometimes sounds pedestrian in his commentary (''life without parole. even when you know it's coming, it still stings.''). his book's peppered with gratuitous product placements (a virtual catalogue of his accouterments, from van cleef, armani, hermès). it can be self-serving (''we were the living embodiment of the whole horatio alger myth'') and self-justifying (what distinguishes him from other harlem drug dealers, he maintains, was his willingness to give back to the community).  he occasionally digresses into sociology and even pop psychology (comparing black and italian mobsters, he says that fractures in his associates' personal lives had ''something to do with the inability of the council members to bind together as a family when the father was gone'').  but mr. barnes also comes across as shrewd, even witty. mulling where all his money went, he accuses one former girlfriend of having had a black belt in shopping; he wonders why president carter considered him smug in the times photograph, writing that he was wearing his least flashy duds: ''it's a wash-and-wear blue denim suit.''  he writes: ''maybe it was 'cause i used to be an addict, but i could never get enough money.''  for his role in reducing the prison sentence, rudy giuliani is one of his ''straight-up'' heroes; his tormentors include mario merola, the former bronx district attorney, and senators charles e. schumer and alfonse m. d'amato.  the author also seeks to settle old grudges, starting immediately, with the dedication. it exhorts an unnamed federal prison inmate to read the book, which has the subtitle ''the rise, fall, and resurrection of heroin's teflon don''; when he gets to the last page, writes mr. barnes, ''i want you to look up, see where i put you and ask yourself, was it worth it? ask yourself that every day until you die.''  mr. barnes seems so intent on revenge against those who betrayed him that a reader might wonder whether all the events and conversations occurred precisely as he describes them. as he said about being resentenced to a lesser term, ''i told the judge what he wanted to hear; only now, it was kind of true.''  nicky barnes cited the statute of limitations. in ''outdoor monuments of manhattan: a historical guide'' (nyu press, $18.95 paperback, $60 cloth), dianne durante suggests that there are few limitations to statues.  ''they can make you stop, look and think when you'd swear your brain was too tired to function,'' she writes. ''the achievements and the virtues of the people represented in these statues can help supply the emotional fuel -- the psychological energy -- that keeps you going.''  her guidebook is a perfect walking-tour accompaniment to help new yorkers and visitors find, identify and better appreciate statues famous and obscure (honoring, among others, the ''father of gynecology'' and the general who had an unremarkable military and business career but composed taps, the bugle call).  while the tone is sometimes preachy and pedantic (the book concludes with a tutorial on how to read a sculpture), ms. durante winsomely places 54 monuments in historical and artistic perspective.  we learn that a trumpet is an allegory for announcing fame, that the monument to admiral farragut in madison square park altered the course of american sculpture, that the figure with the winged hat atop grand central terminal is mercury and that the statue of atlas at rockefeller center was reviled when it was unveiled in 1937 because it supposedly resembled mussolini.  let's hope ms. durante follows up in the other four boroughs.  which neighborhood personifies brooklyn?  ''if one word were to describe the heart, soul and spirit of brooklyn,'' brian merlis and lee a. rosenzweig write, ''that word would be flatbush.'' i would have chosen brownsville, but the authors of ''brooklyn's flatbush: battlefield to ebbets field'' (brooklyn editions, $40) make a convincing case that it is the historical and geographic heart of the borough.  this latest book in their series on the borough's neighborhoods is richly illustrated with black-and-white photographs that are bound to evoke pangs of nostalgia in former brooklynites of a certain age.  recently published  the great kisser  by david evanier  (rager media, $24.95)  high rise low down  who's who and what's what  in new york's most coveted apartment houses  by denise lefrak calicchio and eunice david with kathryn livingston  (barricade books, $24.95)  in this rain  by s. j. rozan  (delacorte press, $24)  new york  city of islands  photographs by jake rajs  essay by pete hamill  (monacelli press, $25)  queens  what to do, where to go (and how not to get lost) in new york's undiscovered borough  by ellen freudenheim  (st. martin's griffin, $17.95)  somewhere  the life of jerome robbins  by amanda vaill  (broadway books, $40)  reading new york  