after times of grief and doubt, a tennis ace is hungry again   the australian open was to begin in four days, and serena williams was so upset about the state of her game that she had locked herself in her hotel room after losing early in a low-level tennis tournament in hobart, tasmania.  unable to speak to her daughter directly, her mother and coach, oracene price, kept sending her e-mail messages. ''like, 'serena it's o.k.,' or 'where are you? you need to come out and need to go to train,' '' williams remembered. ''she wrote me so many.''  williams said she ended up seeking solace by herself in a park in hobart and putting herself through what she called ''the ultimate workout'' to vent her frustration at losing to the 54th-ranked sybille bammer.  ''i went to this field where no one was and had a 'rocky' moment,'' she said. ''i had no water, just had on my workout gear, and i was determined not to let that happen again.''  her renewed determination was there for all to see once she arrived in melbourne and swept to victory on saturday in the australian open, her eighth and most unexpected grand slam singles title.  williams also won the open in 2005, but since then she had failed to reach a final in any event. she had struggled with injuries and with depression in the wake of a family tragedy, struggled with her weight and commitments, and struggled to pro-duce even a pale imitation of the form that helped her dominate the game for most of 2002 and 2003.  but at 25, she is now back on the cutting edge of her sport.  ''i just needed to regroup,'' she said saturday in an interview with a group of reporters. ''i was able to take some time off and look at some matches and a tennis court and say, 'wow, i should be there and do that,' and get hungry again. there's nothing like being hungry for the sport of tennis, and i was really eager and famished, and i needed to feed.''  williams had certainly looked eager several hours earlier when, with her game face and her huge serve firmly in place, she had overwhelmed top-seeded maria sharapova in the final, 6-1, 6-2, by taking risks and converting point after point.  ''she was going for it, making the most of it,'' sharapova said.  williams emerged in the 1990s from the tennis nowhere of compton, calif., with her sister venus to take the sport by storm. serena dominated the circuit, winning seven grand slam titles, including three in 2002, and reigning as the world's top-ranked woman for 57 consecutive weeks in 2002 and 2003. her victory here was all the more remarkable considering that no american woman was among the 32 seeded players.  it was a triumph that she dedicated to her half-sister yetunde price, who was murdered in september 2003, and a victory that williams said symbolized her renewed desire to keep her eye on the ball and on the game's biggest prizes. williams had not often made the most of her talent of late.  ''i can definitely see how some people might have said, 'what happened to serena williams?' '' she said.  ''but i think some of it was that i was dealing with a lot of stuff, and i was just trying to figure out my game and trying to figure out what i wanted to do and make it work. all i wanted to do was be the best tennis player, and at the same time i wanted to be really happy and do what made me happy. the thing that makes me happiest is playing tennis. i love winning.''  williams made similarly upbeat pronouncements after she won in melbourne with less-than-ideal preparation in 2005. ''i'm definitely going to dedicate my life to tennis this year,'' she said then.  but she ended up missing most of that season. ''that victory in 2005 was both a blessing and a curse,'' said her agent, jill smoller.  in an interview earlier in the tournament, price said her daughter sometimes stopped training as seriously as she had in the past after knee surgery had knocked her off her tennis pedestal in 2003.  ''just lazy, and having fun and doing the hollywood thing and just enjoying it,'' said price, referring to her daughter's nascent acting career. ''because when you think about it, she and venus were on the court since they were 4 years old. they needed a little break.''  williams agreed. ''i just needed some time to just reflect and to pull myself together and to get myself together physically,'' she said. ''and then when i was taking that physical break, i was able to get a mental break, as well, that i desperately needed.''  but she said the real problem in 2005 after her last title here was not complacency but a leg injury she sustained in april at a tournament in amelia island off the coast of florida.  ''it all just went downhill after i got injured there, and i didn't take care of myself the way i should have,'' she said. ''i should have had arthroscopic surgery on my knee. i missed the french and shouldn't have gone to wimbledon.''  at wimbledon in 2005, she lost in the third round to the unseeded jill craybas. ''i was probably at half a percent,'' williams said.  her preparation for the australian open was hardly ideal, in part because she, her sister venus and father, richard, were in a florida courtroom defending themselves in a breach-of-contract lawsuit filed by a match promoter. the trial began in november and ended dec. 21.  baris ergun, the williamses' hitting partner, said that he arrived in florida from his native turkey on dec. 1 to work with serena, but that they ended up practicing sparingly. ''only 10 times in 40 days,'' ergun said.  when they did practice, ergun said, williams would usually hit with venus, who he said was recovering from left wrist surgery and unable to hit her two-handed backhand, but was able to hit one-handed backhand slices.  venus withdrew from the australian open, but the lack of regular workouts caused serena to gain weight. when she traveled to tasmania, to play in hobart, she was beaten in the quarterfinals by bammer. the hobart event was a tier 4 tournament, the lowest level on the women's tour.  ''i thought for sure i'd be able to win a tier 4 event; i thought it was definitely going to be a sure winner,'' williams said.  but she channeled her frustration into seven consecutive victories in melbourne, defeating six seeded players as her confidence soared and her huge serve carried her through the most difficult moments. that a player so short on competition could win a grand slam event is a tribute to her phenomenal talent or a critique of the state of women's tennis or perhaps both.  ''i think it's a combination,'' said heinz gunthardt, the longtime coach of the german champion steffi graf. ''serena is a tremendous competitor. when you come back from a long layoff, usually what you don't have is the confidence to go win big points because you doubt yourself. she has it. at the same time, the depth at the very top has suffered a bit in my opinion, because of the injuries and retirements.''  the question now is whether williams will use this stunning comeback as motivation to rededicate herself to the game, or whether such quick gratification will send her the signal that she can still play part time in less than optimum shape and walk off with the game's biggest trophies.  ''i just happened to play better today,'' she said after the final. ''and you best believe maria is going home tomorrow to practice, and i'm not going to sleep on that. i'm not going to soak this up too much. i'm going to go home and train, too.''  although williams is carrying more weight than she did at the peak ofher tennis career in 2003, she said that others underestimated her level of fitness. ''i definitely think i'm in better shape than i get credit for,'' she said.  ''i think no matter if i were not to eat for two years, i still wouldn't be a size 2, because no matter how slim i am, i always have this and that,'' she added, pointing to her backside and her breasts.  when a reporter suggested that she was living in a world that valued slimness, she laughed. ''we are living in a kate olsen world,'' she said in a reference to the actress mary-kate olsen. ''i'm just not built that way.''  williams said she planned to play three events in the next two months. but none of those will have the same impact on her career as this tournament. when she played against sharapova on saturday, she gave herself some added inspiration by writing a special note to herself to read on changeovers.  ''usually i write, 'look at the ball, move forward, do this, do that,' '' williams said. this time, recalling her slain half-sister, she wrote just one word: ''yetunde.''  australian open  